= mongoid-tree http://travis-ci.org/benedikt/mongoid-tree.png

A tree structure for Mongoid documents using the materialized path pattern

== Requirements

* mongoid (~> 2.0)


== Install

To install mongoid_tree, simply add it to your Gemfile:

  gem 'mongoid-tree', :require => 'mongoid/tree'

In order to get the latest development version of mongoid-tree:

  gem 'mongoid-tree', :git => 'git://github.com/benedikt/mongoid-tree', :require => 'mongoid/tree'

You might want to remove the <tt>:require => 'mongoid/tree'</tt> option and explicitly <tt>require 'mongoid/tree'</tt> where needed and finally run

  bundle install


== Usage

Read the API documentation at http://benedikt.github.com/mongoid-tree and take a look at the Mongoid::Tree module

  class Node
    include Mongoid::Document
    include Mongoid::Tree
  end


=== Utility methods

There are several utility methods that help getting to other related documents in the tree:

  Node.root
  Node.roots
  Node.leaves

  node.root
  node.parent
  node.children
  node.ancestors
  node.ancestors_and_self
  node.descendants
  node.descendants_and_self
  node.siblings
  node.siblings_and_self
  node.leaves

In addition it's possible to check certain aspects of the document's position in the tree:

  node.root?
  node.leaf?
  node.depth
  node.ancestor_of?(other)
  node.descendant_of?(other)
  node.sibling_of?(other)

See Mongoid::Tree for more information on these methods.


=== Ordering

Mongoid::Tree doesn't order children by default. To enable ordering of tree nodes include the Mongoid::Tree::Ordering module. This will add a <tt>position</tt> field to your document and provide additional utility methods:

  node.lower_siblings
  node.higher_siblings
  node.first_sibling_in_list
  node.last_sibling_in_list

  node.move_up
  node.move_down
  node.move_to_top
  node.move_to_bottom
  node.move_above(other)
  node.move_below(other)

  node.at_top?
  node.at_bottom?

Example:

  class Node
    include Mongoid::Document
    include Mongoid::Tree
    include Mongoid::Tree::Ordering
  end

See Mongoid::Tree::Ordering for more information on these methods.

=== Traversal

It's possible to traverse the tree using different traversal methods using the Mongoid::Tree::Traversal module.

Example:

  class Node
    include Mongoid::Document
    include Mongoid::Tree
    include Mongoid::Tree::Traversal
  end

  node.traverse(:breadth_first) do |n|
    # Do something with Node n
  end


=== Destroying

Mongoid::Tree does not handle destroying of nodes by default. However it provides several strategies that help you to deal with children of deleted documents. You can simply add them as <tt>before_destroy</tt> callbacks.

Available strategies are:

* :nullify_children -- Sets the children's parent_id to null
* :move_children_to_parent -- Moves the children to the current document's parent
* :destroy_children -- Destroys all children by calling their #destroy method (invokes callbacks)
* :delete_descendants -- Deletes all descendants using a database query (doesn't invoke callbacks)

Example:

  class Node
    include Mongoid::Document
    include Mongoid::Tree

    before_destroy :nullify_children
  end


=== Callbacks

There are two callbacks that are called before and after the rearranging process. This enables you to do additional computations after the documents position in the tree is updated. See Mongoid::Tree for details.

Example:

  class Page
    include Mongoid::Document
    include Mongoid::Tree

    after_rearrange :rebuild_path

    field :slug
    field :path

    private

    def rebuild_path
      self.path = self.ancestors_and_self.collect(&:slug).join('/')
    end
  end


=== Validations

Mongoid::Tree currently does not validate the document's children or parent associations by default. To explicitly enable validation for children and parent documents it's required to add a <tt>validates_associated</tt> validation.

Example

  class Node
    include Mongoid::Document
    include Mongoid::Tree

    validates_associated :parent, :children
  end


== Build Status

mongoid-tree is on {Travis}[http://travis-ci.org/benedikt/mongoid-tree] running the specs on Ruby 1.8.7, Ruby 1.9.2 and Ruby Enterprise Edition.


== Known issues

See https://github.com/benedikt/mongoid-tree/issues


== Repository

See https://github.com/benedikt/mongoid-tree and feel free to fork it!


== Contributors

See a list of all contributors at https://github.com/benedikt/mongoid-tree/contributors. Thanks a lot everyone!


== Copyright

Copyright (c) 2010-2011 Benedikt Deicke. See LICENSE for details.
